{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949\cocoasubrtf540
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13860\viewh17120\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 The authors would like to thank both reviewers for helpful comments.  Please see below for specific responses (in bold).
\b0 \
\
Reviewer #1 (Comments to the Author (Required)):\
\
This submission by Vogelstein and colleagues presents techniques for extracting spiking information from calcium imaging data. A particularly noteworthy feature is the attention that the authors have placed on developing computationally tractable algorithms. The submission is timely, as calcium imaging of large populations is becoming more common. The exposition and illustrations are clear and very detailed, allowing others to readily apply these methods. While there are now several solutions to this problem, I suspect that the methods presented here will become the preferred solution (or the major foundation for even newer developments) for many labs.\
\
The manuscript is already very good, and I have no major issues with it. Three "medium" issues:\
\
1. In the paragraph following Eq. 10b, the discussion of optimizing these in the following paragraph considers only an enumeration approach with constraints on integer n_t; the difficulties of this approach are used to motivate the exponential approximation. However, this ignores the possibility that Eq. 10b could be expanded by Stirling's formula, and (as with the exponential approximation) allow continuous n_t. Naturally, the argument of the exponential would no longer be quadratic, and would contain log terms. However, the authors' barrier method also introduces log terms into the penalty function, and so it is not obvious that this would be any more challenging numerically. Indeed, with Stirling's approximation it would appear that the barrier method would not be necessary. The authors may want to explore, or at least discuss, this possibility. (If they are particularly interested in the case where the number of spikes in each frame is low, it is possible that the exponential approximation is better.)\
\

\b We found this to be a very interesting suggestion. However, upon deeper investigation, we determined that Stirling's approximation is quite poor when the number of spikes per frame is low (even negative at times).  In the discussion, we do however expound upon a different and potentially improved approximation to the exponential distribution.\

\b0 \
2. The estimation of beta seems to be perhaps the most important parameter. The nonnegativity, clearly a useful constraint, becomes less powerful if beta is estimated as being too low, because the algorithm would then assign a "dense" spike train (i.e., with multiple spikes/significant probability of spiking in each frame). Fig 7 contains perhaps the example that comes closest to realizing this outcome. I'm curious to know why this isn't found in other cases, given that the authors have not imposed any form of sparseness constraint that I can detect. Is this a consequence of the exponential approximation, which is more accurate for spike rates that are low? Or is there some other reason that the examples produce sparse spiking?\
\

\b Indeed the exponential assumption implicitly imposes a sparse constraint on the inferred spikes.  We have modified the text in a number of places (see Sections 2.3, 3.1, and 4) to clarify this previously nearly absent, but very important point.\

\b0 \
3. It seems there is no figure showing real experimental data analyzed with the overlapping spatial filter? Is this because the authors lack a data set with "ground truth" spiking for this case? That would be reasonable grounds for not showing this type of analysis, but they should be aware that people who apply these methods will surely want to run their code on this type of data set. Some comments about the realities of running this algorithm, and comparison with the recent work of Mukamel et al (ref. 30), could be helpful.\
\

\b Although we have not utilized the spatial filter with any experimental data, we have now explicitly mentioned the availability of the code for others to try it on their data.  We have also mentioned the work of Mukamel in the discussion, and briefly mentioned the relationship between this work and theirs.\

\b0 \
\
Minor points:\
First sentence of the abstract: "are gaining" -> "is gaining"\
\
p.2, end of 1st paragraph in "Data driven generative model": main-text description of histogram in Fig. 1 has the solid/dashed reversed from what is shown in the figure.\
\
Some of the figure captions could be more clearly marked as simulations. It could be helpful to have a convention of starting all captions with either "(Simulation)" or "(Experimental data)."\
\

\b All these points have been corrected, thank you.\

\b0 \
\
\
Reviewer #2 (Comments to the Author (Required)):\
\
Calcium imaging provides an increasingly popular method for measuring neural activity in large populations of neurons both in brain slices and in vivo. While calcium signals largely reflect firing of action potentials (AP) in neurons, estimation of the underlying firing pattern from the calcium indicator fluorescence recordings alone remains challenging. Recently, a number of groups, including the authors of this manuscript, have presented various algorithms for the reconstruction of APs from calcium imaging. The current manuscript presents yet another approach for achieving this goal. \
In line with previous work (Vogelstein et al., Biophys. J. 97(2):636), the authors pursue an optimization strategy to estimate the most likely firing pattern giving rise to an observed calcium signal. Unlike previous approaches, the authors here present an analytical solution to the problem, which they achieve by approximating the 'true' Poisson distribution underlying spiking events with an exponential distribution. Since the presented algorithm relies on analytical rather than numerical methods, it is guaranteed to converge on the optimal solution very quickly. This is a novel and original development, which is also attractive because of the possibility to implement it in a computationally efficient way.\
\
While the authors provide a detailed, thorough and understandable description of the novel algorithm in the Methods section, their evaluation of the algorithm using simulated and measured data is insufficient. Specifically, a quantitative analysis of the performance of the algorithm is completely lacking. It is therefore impossible to judge - based on the results presented here - in how far and in what particular aspects the new algorithm represents an improvement compared to previous methods. \
\
Specific comments:\
\
Methods\
\
1. The authors should comment on the error expected from approximating a Poisson distribution with an exponential distribution. \
\

\b In the discussion we now describe in greater the accuracy of the exponential distribution, in comparison with several other possibilities. \

\b0 \
Results\
2. The main results are not well enough supported by a quantitative analysis of the inference algorithm. Statements like "very efficiently" (pg. 9, line 5 from bottom), "clearly .. more closely resembles" (pg. 9, line 3 from bottom), "poor inference quality" (pg. 10, line 10), "it is clear that .. it outperforms..) (pg. 10, line 24) or even "significantly more accurate" (Fig. 2 legend) need to be substantiated by a quantitative evaluation and a statistical comparison of the algorithm's performances. Such an evaluation is entirely missing in the manuscript. \
\

\b We have reworded our claims, and added another figure to quantify the performance of our inference technique versus the Wiener filter performance (see current Figure 3).\

\b0 \
3. A key evaluation criterion is the difference between the estimated and the real spike trains (in terms of number of spikes and of spike time accuracy). For example, in Figs. 2 and 3 on artificial data it is not obvious at all, whether the fast filter or the Wiener filter performs better, since both seem to predict spike occurrences well within the temporal resolution provided (taking the peaks of the Wiener filter). It also remains completely unexplored how the performance of the inference algorithms depends on critical parameters such as the noise level, the amplitude of single-spike evoked calcium transients, and the data sampling rate. A systematic examination of these dependencies would be very helpful.\
\
4. Likewise the analysis of the performance of the fast filter on experimental data is lacking a convincing quantitative analysis: In Figs. 4 and 6 false positives are apparent in the fast filter results, but they are neither mentioned nor further evaluated. There is also no mentioning of how the background 'spiking' level of the filter results in Figs. 7, 9, and 10 is dealt with and what its origin is. Obviously, a simple thresholding procedure would fail to eliminate all false positives (or negatives). A statistical analysis has to be performed to substantiate the claim that 'fast filter significantly outperforms the Wiener filter' (Fig. 4 legend). Most importantly, however, there is no direct comparison of the estimated and the real spike times. Many of the traces, in particular those for bursts of spikes, would need to be shown expanded time scale in order to be able to visually inspect the quality of spike inference. It is not even clear how often spike are correctly assigned to the correct acquisition frame and it is also impossible to see how many spikes are contained within the bursts in Figs. 4,5, and 7. The authors should display zoomed figure panels with larger time intervals.\
\

\b The above two points raise a number of important issues.  A key difference between the fast filter and the Wiener filter is that upon implementing the fast filter, there is no need for a post-processing step to threshold.  Indeed, choosing the "correct" threshold is itself a non-trivial problem.  To quantify the relative performance of the two filters, we've now computed the correlation coefficient between the inferred spike trains and the real spike train using both filters.  In fact, no matter how one thresholds the Wiener filter, the fast filter always performs better according to this metric.  We've also shown a zoomed in version of a particular train (current Figure 6) clearly depicting that the fast filter correctly infers both the number of spikes and the timing of individual spikes within spiking events, unlike the Wiener filter.  \

\b0 \
\
5. Essential information is missing in the results section. What was the speed of fluorescence recordings? What was the range of baseline noise levels, which apparently varied between experiments and/or cells? How large were noise levels in comparison to single spike-evoked transients? How reliable could single spikes be inferred? What were the filter parameters in Figs. 4ff? What were the initial settings of algorithm parameters in Fig. 3 and how did the estimated parameter values compare with the true ones? What were the algorithm parameter settings in the applications to the experimental data? Since sometimes the recording durations used for parameter estimation and display were different (Fig. 5), these important time window as well as all results for estimated parameters need to be given for all Figure data. \
\

\b Thank you for pointing out this omission, we have added essential information, either in the main text or the figure captions.
\b0 \
\
6. Instead of providing a quantitative evaluation of the algorithm's performance the authors elaborate in section 3.2 on several extensions, for which no data are shown and which anyway do not seem to give any improvements. These additions could be just mentioned in the Discussion. \
\

\b After much debate, we have decided to leave these in the results section, as they  are results, just mostly negative ones.  Further, they set the stage for the SMC section, and we have now added much to the discussion section. \

\b0 \
\
7. Section 3.3.4. Again it is NOT obvious that "the SMC filter outperforms the fast filter on biological data" (pg. 13, line 7 from bottom, referring to Fig. 7). This statement needs to be based on a thorough quantification. \
\

\b We have tried to clarify this point in the text.\

\b0 \
Discussion\
8. The authors claim that their approach works on "all the in vivo and in vitro data analyzed", yet no in vivo results are presented in the manuscript. \
\

\b in vivo has been removed.\

\b0 \
9. Overall, the discussion is relatively short and the comparison with other existing methods could be extended. The possible extensions provided in section 3.3 could be rather discussed in the Discussion. \
\

\b We added several detailed extensions to the discussion that we have not yet implemented.\

\b0 \
Minor points\
\
10. Units of fluorescence traces should be stated as relative percentage fluorescence changes DF/F, not normalized between 0 and 1 (or at least both versions should be given). DF/F is the standard way to present such calcium indicator data and allows a comparison with published work. \
\

\b Corrected.\

\b0 \
11. Does the filter also work in non-sparse firing regimes? Up to what firing frequency is reliable AP reconstruction possible?\
\

\b See current Figure 3.}